English (AU) (Spoken) [Manually Transcribed Captions]
github.com/WizardTim/WizardTim-captions
So in the last video we had a look at this
here PIR sensor manufactured by HPM and we
had a close look at what's inside one of
these as well as the failure mode it had
and then we had a closer look at this here
metal can which is the pyroelectric sensor
since making that video I've been given this
here PIR sensor this one is manufactured by
ROBUS and is a "PROTON UNIVERSAL 360° PIR"
sensor designed for mounting on ceilings
and this particular unit has been given to me
because it's broken so in this video we're going
to try and repair it but also we'll take a look
at the actual PIR sensor as well because in the
previous video I mentioned that there was such a
thing as a quad type pyroelectric sensor and well
judging by the shape of the detection pattern of
this unit I suspect that we're going to see one
of these inside so let's take this thing apart
taking the front bezel off there's no screws
underneath however there are three adjustment pots
one for lux which is because this has day night
sensing number for sensitivity and another
for time which is how long it spends on for
but on the back we can see there's four screws
as well as this nice little connection block for
the wires and this is only a three pin device
one for the active in, one for neutral and one
for the active out which is switched and of
course there's no earth because there's no
exposed metal work on this device so taking those
four screws out and we can see what's inside and
there's even more than the previous PIR sensor
there's actually three of these rather large
16-pin SOIC devices plenty of capacitors probably
for timing and bulk decoupling as well as a nice
fuse the output relay some X class suppression
capacitors and of course the potentiometers but
taking a look at the others oh okay uh I was
expecting a single quad type pyroelectric
sensor but actually they've gone and put three I
would presume just normal dual type pyroelectric
sensors in at 120 degrees to get there 360 degree
coverage but this will certainly work as well but
I guess we're not going to take a look at a quad
type sensor today taking a look back at the datasheet
now I now realize I was rather misled by
this figure here we can see that at a ceiling
height of say three meters it's expected to have
a spread of 18 meters I now realize that this
diagram is definitely not to scale here it is two
scale so yeah it's definitely got a much larger
range than I thought you definitely can't achieve
this sort of range without either some very fancy
optics or rather just shoving three of them on a
PCB under the same optics which is certainly
going to get the job done but unfortunately
means we're not going to be looking at a
quad type sensor today however this PIR sensor
still needs to be repaired so let's see if we
can identify the failure mode because I was told
this thing just behaves strangely and doesn't work
properly it's not that it doesn't work at all or
that it's uh done weird things made a loud bang
sound it's just that it's not reliable so I've
got some test probes on the AC in as well as
the neutral and that's connected to this plug and
plugging it into 240 volts AC there's no explosion
I heard some clicking so it's doing
something now let's get this flipped over
because there's a LED on the other side plugging
it in again and yeah there's some weird clicking
uh and this red light's flashing let me
dim the light so you can see that better
so the red LED is flashing quickly looking at the
manual this appears to be the warm-up routine that
goes for a minute and after a minute that light
stops flashing and if I bring my hand close to it
it does actually activate although it's it doesn't
seem to actually switch properly and after it does
it once it doesn't seem to want to do it again so
there's some sort of weird thing happening here
I'm wondering if maybe the relay...? is the relay
closing drawing too much power and then browningout
the power supply that's the only thing
I can imagine that would create this symptom
so I guess the first thing we're going to
try is to check the power supply now this
thing uses a capacitive dropper power supply
which is non-isolated it seems to use these two
capacitors here I'm not quite sure why there's
two of them or actually it's probably just the
one of them's for the control electronics
and the other one is for the relay coil
so testing the first capacitor we should get 100
nanofarads and yea 32 is definitely not 100
uh that's the right thing right? yeah that's the
100 nanofarad capacitor yep so that uh... it could
be that it's in circuit but that doesn't
seem right uh checking the other one this
one should be 470 nanofarads and it's 383
yeah these capacitors have me a bit suspicious
so let me get these capacitors out and we can test
them outside of the circuit so I've got here this
LCR meter which is better than the DMM and it's
measuring 381 nanofarad so yeah it's definitely
not 470 there's something wrong with this one and
the other one which should measure 100 nanofarads
is 31.8 so yeah both of these capacitors
are just completely rooted especially this
100 nanofarad one which is actually about 32
nanofarads this thing is going to cause all sorts
of havoc in the circuit it's just not going
to supply enough current to run the circuit
so I reckon there's a pretty good indication that
this is what the problem is and of course these
capacitive dropper power supplies do actually fail
quite often you'll see a lot of YouTube videos
and Wiki articles and blog posts about people
repairing these capacitive droppers because the
capacitor has lost its capacitance it's quite a
common thing so I really wouldn't recommend one of
these capacitive dropper power suppliers they're
just not very reliable although the advantage
that they have is that they're absolutely dirt
cheap you really cannot beat the price point of a
capacitor rather than an entire switch mode power
supply so that's why they get used all the time
but at the very least it makes for a very easy
repair so I had a look around for some replacement
capacitors and I settled on the MKP339 X2 series
from Vishay these are some quite nice capacitors
these are from a reputable brand and they're
rated to higher voltages than the previous ones
the previous ones were 275 volt AC rated these
ones are 310 volts AC rated so these should last
hopefully a lot longer than the previous ones and
of course because these are used in a capacitive
dropper it's important to use the same values
unlike bulk decoupling capacitors where you can
just increase the capacitance value and increase
the voltage rating so long as they're at least a
certain number it's good enough in this case the
capacitance value is very important because if
you make the capacitance value too large you'll
pass too much current and you risk overheating
the shunt regulator inside so we're going to go
for a 0.47 microfarad and 0.1 microfarad which
is exactly the same as was in here before and of
course I chose one with the correct case size
and lead spacing so it would fit in the PCB and
just to be safe I check them on the LCR meter when
I got them and they were indeed the correct
value within the tolerances of manufacturing
so it's just a matter of cleaning up those
plated through holes to get the components
in thankfully I've repaired my desoldering
gun since the last video it's very important
you keep your desoldering gun nice and
clean make sure that there's absolutely
nothing left in the tube otherwise it
will clog and you'll have a bad day
and apart from that there's really nothing
complicated about this repair it's just a matter
of soldering two components in nice and easy and
now that I've got them in we can see that they fit
nicely and they are indeed the correct height so
they won't interfere with the plastic enclosure
and then just putting it all
back together and plugging it in
and I'd let it go through its
one minute warm-up procedure
and if we listen carefully we can hear
it click when I put my hand over it
*click*
and I've spent several minutes
waving my hands in front of this thing
and taking them away trying to catch this
thing out make it fail again but I haven't
made it fail again so I think it's fixed now
so that was a rather nice repair very easy to
fault find very obvious failure mode and very
easy solution and these capacitors were only
about a dollar fifty each which is quite nice
because these things are about sixty dollars new
so that's it for the repair but let's take a look
at these capacitors a bit closer whilst I've got
them out and also because I was denied that quad
type pyroelectric sensor so let's test these
capacitors to the extreme and uh... well actually
let's just blow them up so I've got here
a 1.5 kilovolt peak to peak biphasic pulse this is
a 360 joule pulse delivered over 15 milliseconds
actually let's put this into perspective
here is a quarter watt 56 ohm resistor and
*pop*
yeah it just explodes yeah that's uh not a
very happy resistor you can see here in this
microscope picture the resistive element has just
been completely vaporized off the resistor core
but also let's have a look at a 400 volt [4.7]
microfarad capacitor out of a USB charger and
*pop*
yeah that thing never stood a chance either
so let's test our two other capacitors
this is exactly the same pulse so I'm
hoping we get some nice fireworks although
I am hoping that the Vishay one stands
up a little bit better and hoping that
the JIMSON brand one just catastrophically
explodes everywhere and...
*contactor thud*
oh what?!
oh what nah
uh let me do that again
*contactor thud*
oh what?! who's bloody well sold me capacitors that don't explode!
Come on!
so as you're probably screaming at the screen
right now these are of course X2 class safety
capacitors all of these funny markings on the
side of them aren't just to make it look pretty
these are actually all sorts of compliance and
regulatory markings that say that it complies
with all sorts of safety standards that say it can
withstand certain sorts of abuse so in the case of
these two capacitors that are X2 class rated even
this JIMSON I don't know I've never heard of them
before but even this one is rated to withstand
1.2 kilovolts for a minute and this Vishay one
specifically says it withstands 24 pulses at 2.5
kilovolts so unfortunately I don't have anything
that goes that high I did pulse this thing 15
times and it didn't explode so yeah unfortunately
I can't make it explode but I hope that this at
least demonstrated that these little unassuming
capacitors can actually put up a pretty good fight
against what's on the other side of these outlets
the sort of stuff in our electrical distribution
network is rather big and scary and can create
all sorts of weird transients that have the
opportunity to blow things up if it weren't
for these little suppression capacitors although
of course it's not just these capacitors that save
your gadget from being exploded there's of course
also Y class suppression capacitors as well as
varistors and PTCs and NTCs and of course fuses
and those are the components that will generally
be absorbing the large pulses these X class
capacitors are more so for EMI suppression
when another device nearby emits some sort of
interference that could interfere with your device
but that's all nice and everything but why
is it that I just put 1.5 kilovolts through
this capacitor and it didn't explode in
fact it didn't even lose any capacitance
uh if it wasn't line transients that made this
100 nanofarad capacitor go to 32 nanofarads what
did because that's quite often what I see people
will say that these things get overvolted and they
internally fuse and lose capacitance over time so
let's cut one of these open and see if we can find
anything that's obviously wrong with it these
capacitors inside uh just like any other normal
metallized polypropylene capacitor however they
of course need to withstand much higher voltages
and energies so the layer thickness is higher but
also they have much better potting in this epoxy
and plastic shell so I've got the capacitor out
of the potting now and I've unwound a bit and we
can see uh... yea I don't know what I'm looking
at actually um yeah there seems to be some
delamination going on here but I have no clue
what that means however thankfully I have this
here failure diagram and this shows all sorts
of different failure modes that can happen as
well as their causes and of course our value mode
is the capacitance decrease one and that seems to
be caused by all sorts of different things uh but
I'm wondering if uh maybe humidity has something
to do with it partly because looking back at
the footage we can see that there was actually
this here void in the epoxy so I'm wondering if
moisture was able to more easily penetrate this
but this speculation is mostly driven by a video
I saw on the EEVblog channel in which Dave Jones
had an interview with Ron Demko from KYOCERA AVX
in which he went through this document and had
a talk about all the sorts of different failure
modes but specifically had a look at a capacitor
that Dave Jones had out of a heater which was a
very similar capacitor and had some rather similar
sort of failure indicators as my capacitor so I'm
wondering if moisture was the cause whether it was
from poor encapsulation or from the manufacturing
process I have no clue but I do recommend watching
this video if you want to know more Ron goes
into quite a lot of detail about these safety
capacitors and their failure modes as well as
a number of other different capacitor types so
I'll leave a link to that in the description and
that's it for this video so thanks for watching